1)difference between spot instance, on-demand and reserved instance

on-demand: 
spot instance are genrally costly (pay per second) but with no log term commitment, ideal for short term and it highly available.

spot instance:
spot instance are actually cheaper then on-demand instance (90 % cheaper) but can be terminated anytime and also there is no commitment.

reserved instance:
reserve instance require 1-3 years of commitment but provide upto 72 % saving compare to on demand.

2) what if you lost private key to access instance

Stop the EC2 instance (do not terminate).
Detach its root EBS volume.
Attach the volume to another instance where you do have access.
SSH into that helper instance and mount the attached volume.
Navigate to /home/ubuntu/.ssh/authorized_keys or /root/.ssh/authorized_keys.
Add a new public key (matching a new PEM you control).
Detach and reattach the volume back to the original instance.
Start the instance and SSH using the new private key.

2nd method:
Create an AMI from the instance.
Launch a new EC2 instance from that AMI with a new key pair.


EBS :
EBS Is a persistent storage volume for your ec2 its like a external hard drive you can attach and detach from your servers ,its persistent bcz even if the ec2 is terminated
the attached EBS volume will remain there.it gives HA because AWS automatically replicate the volume within an availability zone If AZ crash volume will be delete.
Ec2 and EBS should be in the same AZ, once attached we can mount the volume.

First lsblk to check the partision
Identify the ebs volume device name (volume attached karte time rakhna padta devicename dev xvdf
Sudo mount dev xdvf <kaha mount krna hai>(mnt me ebs best hai rehta )
Type’s    SSD & HDD
          General purpose gp2 -3: suitable for database, file system and webserver
          Provisioned IOPS io1: For high performance application which required low latency

It supports encryption and backup snapshot   we can scale the size of ec2 attached EBS volume without stopping the instance.
By default when you delete instance EBS will be terminated for that you need to specify before attaching the volume NO option for delete on termination.

Ok we can take snapshot of the volume after that we can create volume from snapshot we can choose the AZ you want and from that volume we can create instance.
For incremental snapshot we have to choose incremental backup 
aws ec2 create-snapshot - -<volume-id> --description `incremental backup` --<parentsnapshotid> 












